Widgets Overview
================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
  :depth: 2

TurboGears widgets are a simple, yet powerful way to bundle up bits of
HTML, CSS and Javascript into reusable components.   As a consumer of
Widgets, you can use them to create everything from HTML Forms, to Ajax
based AutoComplete fields.

Perhaps the most common use of Widgets right now is as a convenient way
to include form controls in a web page.

In this case, each field is a widget, and the whole form is also a widget
- a compound widget that contains the field widgets. In a simple case the
fields would use standard form controls such as text boxes.

Widget based forms have a number of useful properties.  For example, you
can set up the individual form fields to know their validation rules, and
when you do this, the Form Widget knows how to display any validation
error messages next to the appropriate field if a user enters bad data.

The beauty of widgets is that replacing standard text entry fieds with
"fancy" alternatives is easy for the programmer. For example, you could
use a CalendarDatePicker instead of a TextField, to get a pop-up calendar.


Simple Widget Example
---------------------

Widgets are python objects, which need to be instantiated and setup
before you can use them in your view code.  The standard way to do this
is to instantiate a widget in your controllers.py file.   We'll start
with a simple TextField widget that isn't very exciting, but is easy to
understand in full.  Don't worry, though this isn't all there is.  We've
got fancy javascript heavy widgets that do animation, lightboxes, and
autocomplete fields.

To instantiate a TextField widget instance in your controller you'll need
to import turbogears.widgets into your controller, and create a widget
instance like this::

    fname = TextField(default="Enter your First Name")

This will create a widget instance, which you can pass into a template
and display using it's ``.display()`` method::

     fname.display()

This will automatically add a text input field to your page.  The
rendered HTML should look something like this::

     <INPUT ID="widget" TYPE="text" NAME="widget"
      VALUE="Enter your First Name" CLASS="textfield">

The ``VALUE`` is picked up from the default value we provided at
instantiation time.

But you can override the default at render time, just by passing a value
to the display method, either as the first parameter, or explicitly as
the named parameter value::

     fname.display("mark")

Which would create the following HTML::

     <INPUT ID="widget" TYPE="text"
      VALUE="mark" CLASS="textfield">'

As we mentioned, you can also assign values with the ``value`` parameter::

     fname.display(value="karl")


Setting Widget Parameters
-------------------------

So, now that we've seen a couple of simple examples how we create a
widget and assign parameters, it's probably worth taking a deeper look at
how all of this works.

.. warning:: Widgets instances are **stateless,**
    which means that they should not try to have any *request specific*
    data stored in a widget.


Thread Safety for Widgets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because widgets are stateless, it's really only safe to assign widget
attributes at instantiation time or display time.

In fact, to keep you from shooting yourself in the foot, if you try to
modify an attribute after the widget is instantiate, (other than as a
``.display()`` option) you'll receive a friendly warning message
reminding you that widgets are display logic, not a place to store data.


General Widget Attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's take a look at the various attributes all widgets have, and what
they do.

* **name** -- Defines the name of the widget, for form fields this is
  used  to define the field's `name` attribute.

* **template** -- Defines the Kid template which is used to render the
  HTML for this widget.   In a way this is very standard TurboGears
  stuff. The template can either be a string that is valid Kid Syntax or
  it can be a reference to a .kid template file.  We'll look at
  overriding the template in a bit more depth in the next section, since
  this is a very common requirement for widget users.

* **default** -- As seen above, this just defines the default ``value``
  of the widget.

* **params** --  Widgets ``params`` are where any special characteristics
  of the widget would be defined.   Widgets also have some special
  functions to make sure that any given widget instance has all the
  ``params``, not just from the widget itself, but also from all of its
  bases.

* **attrs** -- You can pass a dictionary to this attribute to set
  arbitrary HTML attributes of the generated HTML element.

In addition several widgets have other attributes which you can setup.
For example, form widgets have an ``action`` attribute which defines what
URL the form will send it's HTTP Post to for processing. Another common
example is the select field widget which has an ``options`` parameter
which takes a list of tuples which define the value returned by the drop
down list and the name that should be displayed in the list.

We will be documenting the complete list of attributes for each of the
built in widgets on the :doc:`WidgetList <List>` page.


Setting Parameters with Callables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

But for now, let's just use the ``options`` attribute of the SelectField
widget as an example of the final way that you can pass information to
widget attributes.  You can define a callable (generally a function, but
any callable will do) which returns the data needed by the widget, and
pass that callable into the widget at instantiation time.  The widget
will automatically call that function whenever you display the widget on
a page.

So, you might want to create a function which gets data from the
database, and creates an options list for display in some widget.  In
this case, we're just going to define list statically in our function,
but extending this to do interesting stuff is just standard python::

    def get_options():
         options= []
         for item in range(11):
             options.append((item, "item %s" %item))
         return options

    my_selector = widgets.SingleSelectField(options=get_options)

This creates a new my_selector widget with a bunch of selection options.
When you do a my_selector.display on your page template you'll get code
like this::

   <SELECT CLASS="singleselectfield" NAME="widget" ID="widget">
        <OPTION VALUE="0">item 0</OPTION>
        <OPTION VALUE="1">item 1</OPTION>
        <OPTION VALUE="2">item 2</OPTION>
        ...
        <OPTION VALUE="10">item 10</OPTION>
    </SELECT>


In addition to the above attributes, there are a couple more, which
define CSS and JavaScript files that need to be imported into your
template for the widget itself to work properly.   These can only be
setup at instantiation time (at render time, it's too late to inject them
into the form itself).

* **css** -- This is where you can define any CSSlinks that are required
  to properly display your widget.  For more details on how all this
  works, see :doc:`Using JavaScript and CSS with widgets <WithJSandCSS>`.

* **javascript** -- This is where you define any JSLink and JSSource for
  the widget.

If you're just using existing widgets, you shouldn't ever have to worry
about ``css`` and ``javascript`` attributes, they should already be set
up for you.


Template Replacement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On of the most common cusomization needs when working with Widgets is
some slight modification of the widget template code.   The Turbogears
Toolbox includes a WidgetBrowser application which, among other things,
shows you all the template code for every widget you have installed.   If
for instance you need to edit the TextField widget's template to include
a <br /> tag after the field you could easily do that by grabbing the
existing template code from the widget browser and modifying it.

Once you've got a modified template, you can either create a new file
(say widgettemplate.kid) and saving it in your templates directory, or
you can pass it to the template attribute as a string.

So if you've saved your new template as widgettemplate.kid you can
instantiate a new text field widget that uses this new template with code
like this::

   field1 = widgets.TextField(name='Field one",
                              template='yourapp.templates.widgettemplate')

Or if you don't want to bother with the extra template file for short
templates, you can just pass your template definition to the template
attribute as a string like this::

   field1 = widgets.TextField(name='Field one",
                              template="""
    <input xmlns:py="http://purl.org/kid/ns#"
        type="text"
        name="${name}"
        class="${field_class}"
        id="${field_id}"
        value="${value}"
        py:attrs="attrs"
    />
    <br />
    """)


Going Beyond Simple Widgets
---------------------------

Single widgets are pretty simple, and you can use them to create reusable
view elements pretty easily.

But there's a whole lot more that's a available to you if you're willing
to go beyond single widgets, and look at the way that Widget based Form
handling integrates Form handling tasks, making it easy to reuse the same
widget to get new data, edit existing data, and handle the display of
validation errors.

Your next step in the Widgets Journey is :doc:`creating a Widget-based form <SimpleForm>`.
